README.md, before:

🍊 Citrus
=====
A Craft CMS plugin for purging and banning Varnish caches when elements are saved.

Installation
---
1. Download and extract the contents of the zip. Copy the /citrus folder to your Craft plugin folder.
2. Enable the Citrus plugin in Craft (Settings > Plugins).
3. [Override default configuration if necessary](https://github.com/njpanderson/Citrus#configuration).
4. [Create optional bindings if needed](https://github.com/njpanderson/Citrus#bindings).
5. [Configure tags as necessary in the template](/njpanderson/Citrus#tagging).

Configuration
---
To configure Citrus, create a new `citrus.php` config file in your config folder, and override settings as needed. The following settings are the default:

| Option | Default |
| --- | --- |
| `varnishHosts` | `[]` |
| `varnishUrl` | (Current site base URL) |
| `varnishHostName` | (Current hostname) |
| `purgeEnabled` | (Dependent on `HTTP_X_VARNISH` header) |
| `purgeRelated` | `true` |
| `logAll` | `0` (Only log important messages) |
| `bansSupported` | `false` |
| `adminIp` | (Empty) |
| `adminPort` | (Empty) |
| `adminSecret` | (Empty) |
| `banQueryHeader` | `Ban-Query-Full` |

The `varnishUrl` setting can also be an array if you are running a multi language site, e.g:

```php
'varnishUrl' => array(
    'no' => 'http://your-varnish-server.com/no/',
    'en' => 'http://your-varnish-server.com/en/',
),
```

#### varnishHosts
Used to configure multiple Varnish hosts. See below for options.

#### varnishUrl
The url to your Varnish server. Usually this is your site url, but it could be different if you don't purge through a private connection, or if you use the IP directly to bypass CloudFlare or similar services. If your site url and the varnish url is different, make sure you handle this in your VCL file.

#### varnishHostName
If the Varnish server cannot be directly referenced via its host name, Citrus has an option to explicitly provide the host name in a second setting. For example:

```php
	'varnishUrl' => 'http://123.123.123.120',
	'varnishHostName' => 'myawesomewebsite.com',
```

All HTTP based requests will be sent to the server by its IP but a `Host` header will also define the host name required.

#### purgeEnabled
Enables or disables the Citrus plugin. You'd normally want to disable it in your dev environments and enable it in your prod environment.

#### purgeRelated
Enables or disables purging of related urls when an element is saved. This should normally be enabled to make sure that all relevant urls are updated, but could be disabled on high traffic websites to make sure the cache stays as warm as possible.

#### logAll
When set to `1` some additional logging is forced even if devMode is disabled. Useful for debugging in production environments without having to enable devMode.

#### purgeUrlMap
A lookup map for purging additional urls that needs it when a given url is purged.

#### bansSupported
If either the admin socket or HTTP banning can be performed on the Varnish hosts, set this option to `true`. Otherwise use `false` and no banning related options will appear. **Important:** changing this option after ban bindings have been added can lead loss of binding settings.

#### adminIP, adminPort & adminSecret
If using the admin socket method for adding bans, the relevant details for the Varnish host IP, admin port and secret file (usually found in `/etc/varnish`) will need to be entered here. If one of these three options is omitted and `bansSupported` is `true`, Citrus will fall back to the HTTP method for banning.

#### banQueryHeader
Defines the header to use for HTTP banning. See "Configuring Varnish" for more information.

Defining multiple Varnish hosts
---
If the CMS is configured behind more than one Varnish host, purge and ban commands can be duplicated to each host required. This can be done by defining the **`varnishHosts`** option.

An example setup for a multilingual, multi-Varnish system could look as follows:

```php
	'varnishHosts' => [
		'main' => [
			'url' => [
				'en_gb' => 'http://123.123.123.121/',
				'it' => 'http://123.123.123.121/it/',
				'ja' => 'http://123.123.123.121/ja/',
			],
			'hostName' => 'myhostname.com',
			'adminIP' => '123.123.123.121',
			'adminPort' => '6082',
			'adminSecret' => '<secret_key>',
		],
		'failover1' => [
			'url' => [
				'en_gb' => 'http://123.123.123.122/',
				'it' => 'http://123.123.123.122/it/',
				'ja' => 'http://123.123.123.122/ja/',
			],
			'hostName' => 'myhostname.com',
			'adminIP' => '123.123.123.122',
			'adminPort' => '6082',
			'adminSecret' => '<secret_key>',
		],
	]
```

It's up to you what name you give each host, which is defined as the array key for each array within `varnishHosts`. The following options can be given for each host:

| Option | See in main config... |
| --- | --- |
| `url` | `varnishUrl` |
| `hostName` | `varnishHostName` |
| `adminIp` | `adminIp` |
| `adminPort` | `adminPort` |
| `adminSecret` | `adminSecret` |


How Citrus works
---
When an element is saved, the plugin collects the urls *that it thinks need to be updated*, and creates a new task that sends purge requests to the Varnish server for each url.

If `purgeRelated` is disabled, only the url for the element itself, or the owners url if the element is a Matrix block, is purged.

If `purgeRelated` is enabled, the urls for all related elements are also purged. If the saved element is an entry, all directly related entry urls, all related category urls, and all urls for elements related through an entries Matrix blocks, is purged. If the saved element is an asset, all urls for elements related to that asset, either directly or through a Matrix block, is purged. And so on. The element types taken into account is
entries, categories, matrix blocks and assets.

If tags are stored, URIs on which the entry has been known to appear are also purged.

Additionally, if the element is an entry, any bindings configured for the section and entry type being edited will also be performed.

The plugin also adds a new element action to entries and categories for purging individual elements manually. When doing this, related elements are not purged, only the selected elements.

Tagging
---
Citrus supports a tagging system which will help to create a list of URLs on which an entry has appeared on the front end. It works by adding the following code to a template wherever an entry might appear:

```twig
{{ craft.citrus.tag({ entryId: entry.id }) }}
```

It's a potentially hard concept to get your head around, so imagine that the tags essentially identify, on a URL of your website, where the entries might be represented on it. For example, if you have a news article, it might be seen on the following URLs:

 - `http://yoursite.com/news/articles/my-article` (As the article page)
 - `http://yoursite.com/news/articles` (Within the listings)
 - `http://yoursite.com/` (As a featured item on the homepage)
 - `http://yoursite.com/related/page` (As a "related" item on a general page)

There are many URLs on which a single entry could potentially appear — not just its own endpoint. When editing an entry, its own URI/slug as well as any relationships might not accurately cover the full range of URLs on which the entry can be seen. The tagging system aims to resolve this by creating a listing of all the URLs associated with the entry and purging them whenever an entry is edited.

Whenever this purge takes place, the URLs registered within the index are then deleted, to avoid unecessarily purging URLs.

The possible parameters for `citrus.tag` are:

| Parameter | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `entryId` | The ID of the entry being shown on a page (usually accessible by `entry.id` |
| `uri` | Usually collected automatically, but can be customised if necessary. The URI on which the entry is being shown. |

Bindings
---
Bindings are premade purge or ban requests which will be sent to your Varnish hosts whenever an entry within the section and entry type is either created or edited.

To create a binding within the "Bindings" navigation of the "Citrus" plugin, first choose the section you wish to edit and then click "Edit bindings". You will be taken to a screen showing all of the **entry types** available to that section, and the bindings can be set within each type.

Click the "Add a row" button to add a new binding, then choose the type of binding, then enter the appropriate query required and click on "Save bindings" to save all of the bindings at once. As with the on-demand banning, query template keys can be used within bans.

The binding types available are as follows:

| Type | Example / Description |
| ---  | --- |
| `PURGE` | `/my/uri?query=1` <br> A simple purge request will be sent to the Varnish hosts for the URI defined. URIs should start with a forward slash. |
| `BAN` | `^.*\.jpe?g` <br> A ban query will be sent to the Varnish hosts. The ban query in this case will be prefixed with the active hostname, which means all that is required to be entered is a regular expression for the URI(s) to ban. |
| `FULLBAN` | `req.http.host == ${hostName} && req.url ~ \?.+ ` <br> A full ban query will be sent to the Varnish hosts. The entire query can be entered here. |


Setting cache headers in your templates
---
Unless overridden within the VCL configuration, Varnish uses cache headers sent by Craft to determine if/how to cache a request. You can configure this in your webserver, but it can be more flexible to configure this within the templates:

```twig
// _layout.twig
{% if expiryTime is not defined %}{% set expiryTime = '+1 week' %}{% endif %}

{% if expiryTime != '0' %}
	{% set expires = now | date_modify(expiryTime) %}
	{% header "Cache-Control: max-age=" ~ (expires.timestamp - now.timestamp) %}
	{% header "Pragma: cache" %}
	{% header "Expires: " ~ expires.rfc1123() %}
{% endif %}
```

The expiry time can then be overridden within individual templates like so:

```twig
// article.twig
{% extends "_layout" %}
{% set expiryTime = '+60 mins' %}
```

Configuring Varnish
---
If not using the admin port method for banning, a small addition will need to be made to the VCL configuration for Varnish in order to enable bans over HTTP.

Citrus sends bans over HTTP by adding a new HTTP Header named "Ban-Query-Full" by default. This header can then be used within the VCL code to instantiate a single ban. The following example is how to handle this header:

```
if (req.method == "BAN") {
	if (!client.ip ~ purge) { # purge is the ACL defined at the begining
		# Not from an allowed IP? Then die with an error.
		return (synth(405, "This IP is not allowed to send PURGE/BAN requests."));
	}

	if (req.http.Ban-Query-Full) {
		ban(req.http.Ban-Query-Full);
		return (synth(200, "Ban added"));
	} else {
		return (synth(400, "Ban query sent without Ban-Query-Full headers."));
	}
}
```

This will enable Varnish to accept ban requests over HTTP from the Citrus plugin.

Why "Citrus"?
---
Citrus juices are a [common alternative](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=stripping+varnish+citrus&t=osx&ia=products) to chemicals for stripping Varnish in the real world. The name felt snappy enough to use for this plugin!

Thanks
---
Many thanks to [aelvan](https://github.com/aelvan/VarnishPurge-Craft) for the original plugin onto which this one has been built.

Commit message:

Add cookie settig for Varnish passing

README.md, after:

🍊 Citrus
=====
A Craft CMS plugin for purging and banning Varnish caches when elements are saved.

Installation
---
1. Download and extract the contents of the zip. Copy the /citrus folder to your Craft plugin folder.
2. Enable the Citrus plugin in Craft (Settings > Plugins).
3. [Override default configuration if necessary](https://github.com/njpanderson/Citrus#configuration).
4. [Create optional bindings if needed](https://github.com/njpanderson/Citrus#bindings).
5. [Configure tags as necessary in the template](/njpanderson/Citrus#tagging).

Configuration
---
To configure Citrus, create a new `citrus.php` config file in your config folder, and override settings as needed. The following settings are the default:

| Option | Default |
| --- | --- |
| `varnishHosts` | `[]` |
| `varnishUrl` | (Current site base URL) |
| `varnishHostName` | (Current hostname) |
| `purgeEnabled` | (Dependent on `HTTP_X_VARNISH` header) |
| `purgeRelated` | `true` |
| `logAll` | `0` (Only log important messages) |
| `bansSupported` | `false` |
| `adminIp` | (Empty) |
| `adminPort` | (Empty) |
| `adminSecret` | (Empty) |
| `banQueryHeader` | `Ban-Query-Full` |
| `adminCookieName` | `CitrusAdmin` |

The `varnishUrl` setting can also be an array if you are running a multi language site, e.g:

```php
'varnishUrl' => array(
    'no' => 'http://your-varnish-server.com/no/',
    'en' => 'http://your-varnish-server.com/en/',
),
```

#### varnishHosts
Used to configure multiple Varnish hosts. See below for options.

#### varnishUrl
The url to your Varnish server. Usually this is your site url, but it could be different if you don't purge through a private connection, or if you use the IP directly to bypass CloudFlare or similar services. If your site url and the varnish url is different, make sure you handle this in your VCL file.

#### varnishHostName
If the Varnish server cannot be directly referenced via its host name, Citrus has an option to explicitly provide the host name in a second setting. For example:

```php
	'varnishUrl' => 'http://123.123.123.120',
	'varnishHostName' => 'myawesomewebsite.com',
```

All HTTP based requests will be sent to the server by its IP but a `Host` header will also define the host name required.

#### purgeEnabled
Enables or disables the Citrus plugin. You'd normally want to disable it in your dev environments and enable it in your prod environment.

#### purgeRelated
Enables or disables purging of related urls when an element is saved. This should normally be enabled to make sure that all relevant urls are updated, but could be disabled on high traffic websites to make sure the cache stays as warm as possible.

#### logAll
When set to `1` some additional logging is forced even if devMode is disabled. Useful for debugging in production environments without having to enable devMode.

#### purgeUrlMap
A lookup map for purging additional urls that needs it when a given url is purged.

#### bansSupported
If either the admin socket or HTTP banning can be performed on the Varnish hosts, set this option to `true`. Otherwise use `false` and no banning related options will appear. **Important:** changing this option after ban bindings have been added can lead loss of binding settings.

#### adminIP, adminPort & adminSecret
If using the admin socket method for adding bans, the relevant details for the Varnish host IP, admin port and secret file (usually found in `/etc/varnish`) will need to be entered here. If one of these three options is omitted and `bansSupported` is `true`, Citrus will fall back to the HTTP method for banning.

#### banQueryHeader
Defines the header to use for HTTP banning. See "Configuring Varnish" for more information.

#### adminCookieName
When logging into the admin, Citrus will set a recognisable cookie which can be optionally used within the Varnish VCL to disable the cache for administrative users on the front end. The name of the cookie can be set with this variable.

So long as you're already passing the admin area with Varnish, an example syntax for preventing caching with this cookie would be as follows:

```
# Disable cache for authenticated users
if (req.http.Cookie ~ "CitrusAdmin=1") {
	return (pass);
}
```

If this feature is not required, then set the name to `false`.

Defining multiple Varnish hosts
---
If the CMS is configured behind more than one Varnish host, purge and ban commands can be duplicated to each host required. This can be done by defining the **`varnishHosts`** option.

An example setup for a multilingual, multi-Varnish system could look as follows:

```php
	'varnishHosts' => [
		'main' => [
			'url' => [
				'en_gb' => 'http://123.123.123.121/',
				'it' => 'http://123.123.123.121/it/',
				'ja' => 'http://123.123.123.121/ja/',
			],
			'hostName' => 'myhostname.com',
			'adminIP' => '123.123.123.121',
			'adminPort' => '6082',
			'adminSecret' => '<secret_key>',
		],
		'failover1' => [
			'url' => [
				'en_gb' => 'http://123.123.123.122/',
				'it' => 'http://123.123.123.122/it/',
				'ja' => 'http://123.123.123.122/ja/',
			],
			'hostName' => 'myhostname.com',
			'adminIP' => '123.123.123.122',
			'adminPort' => '6082',
			'adminSecret' => '<secret_key>',
		],
	]
```

It's up to you what name you give each host, which is defined as the array key for each array within `varnishHosts`. The following options can be given for each host:

| Option | See in main config... |
| --- | --- |
| `url` | `varnishUrl` |
| `hostName` | `varnishHostName` |
| `adminIp` | `adminIp` |
| `adminPort` | `adminPort` |
| `adminSecret` | `adminSecret` |


How Citrus works
---
When an element is saved, the plugin collects the urls *that it thinks need to be updated*, and creates a new task that sends purge requests to the Varnish server for each url.

If `purgeRelated` is disabled, only the url for the element itself, or the owners url if the element is a Matrix block, is purged.

If `purgeRelated` is enabled, the urls for all related elements are also purged. If the saved element is an entry, all directly related entry urls, all related category urls, and all urls for elements related through an entries Matrix blocks, is purged. If the saved element is an asset, all urls for elements related to that asset, either directly or through a Matrix block, is purged. And so on. The element types taken into account is
entries, categories, matrix blocks and assets.

If tags are stored, URIs on which the entry has been known to appear are also purged.

Additionally, if the element is an entry, any bindings configured for the section and entry type being edited will also be performed.

The plugin also adds a new element action to entries and categories for purging individual elements manually. When doing this, related elements are not purged, only the selected elements.

Tagging
---
Citrus supports a tagging system which will help to create a list of URLs on which an entry has appeared on the front end. It works by adding the following code to a template wherever an entry might appear:

```twig
{{ craft.citrus.tag({ entryId: entry.id }) }}
```

It's a potentially hard concept to get your head around, so imagine that the tags essentially identify, on a URL of your website, where the entries might be represented on it. For example, if you have a news article, it might be seen on the following URLs:

 - `http://yoursite.com/news/articles/my-article` (As the article page)
 - `http://yoursite.com/news/articles` (Within the listings)
 - `http://yoursite.com/` (As a featured item on the homepage)
 - `http://yoursite.com/related/page` (As a "related" item on a general page)

There are many URLs on which a single entry could potentially appear — not just its own endpoint. When editing an entry, its own URI/slug as well as any relationships might not accurately cover the full range of URLs on which the entry can be seen. The tagging system aims to resolve this by creating a listing of all the URLs associated with the entry and purging them whenever an entry is edited.

Whenever this purge takes place, the URLs registered within the index are then deleted, to avoid unecessarily purging URLs.

The possible parameters for `citrus.tag` are:

| Parameter | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `entryId` | The ID of the entry being shown on a page (usually accessible by `entry.id` |
| `uri` | Usually collected automatically, but can be customised if necessary. The URI on which the entry is being shown. |

Bindings
---
Bindings are premade purge or ban requests which will be sent to your Varnish hosts whenever an entry within the section and entry type is either created or edited.

To create a binding within the "Bindings" navigation of the "Citrus" plugin, first choose the section you wish to edit and then click "Edit bindings". You will be taken to a screen showing all of the **entry types** available to that section, and the bindings can be set within each type.

Click the "Add a row" button to add a new binding, then choose the type of binding, then enter the appropriate query required and click on "Save bindings" to save all of the bindings at once. As with the on-demand banning, query template keys can be used within bans.

The binding types available are as follows:

| Type | Example / Description |
| ---  | --- |
| `PURGE` | `/my/uri?query=1` <br> A simple purge request will be sent to the Varnish hosts for the URI defined. URIs should start with a forward slash. |
| `BAN` | `^.*\.jpe?g` <br> A ban query will be sent to the Varnish hosts. The ban query in this case will be prefixed with the active hostname, which means all that is required to be entered is a regular expression for the URI(s) to ban. |
| `FULLBAN` | `req.http.host == ${hostName} && req.url ~ \?.+ ` <br> A full ban query will be sent to the Varnish hosts. The entire query can be entered here. |


Setting cache headers in your templates
---
Unless overridden within the VCL configuration, Varnish uses cache headers sent by Craft to determine if/how to cache a request. You can configure this in your webserver, but it can be more flexible to configure this within the templates:

```twig
// _layout.twig
{% if expiryTime is not defined %}{% set expiryTime = '+1 week' %}{% endif %}

{% if expiryTime != '0' %}
	{% set expires = now | date_modify(expiryTime) %}
	{% header "Cache-Control: max-age=" ~ (expires.timestamp - now.timestamp) %}
	{% header "Pragma: cache" %}
	{% header "Expires: " ~ expires.rfc1123() %}
{% endif %}
```

The expiry time can then be overridden within individual templates like so:

```twig
// article.twig
{% extends "_layout" %}
{% set expiryTime = '+60 mins' %}
```

Configuring Varnish
---
If not using the admin port method for banning, a small addition will need to be made to the VCL configuration for Varnish in order to enable bans over HTTP.

Citrus sends bans over HTTP by adding a new HTTP Header named "Ban-Query-Full" by default. This header can then be used within the VCL code to instantiate a single ban. The following example is how to handle this header:

```
if (req.method == "BAN") {
	if (!client.ip ~ purge) { # purge is the ACL defined at the begining
		# Not from an allowed IP? Then die with an error.
		return (synth(405, "This IP is not allowed to send PURGE/BAN requests."));
	}

	if (req.http.Ban-Query-Full) {
		ban(req.http.Ban-Query-Full);
		return (synth(200, "Ban added"));
	} else {
		return (synth(400, "Ban query sent without Ban-Query-Full headers."));
	}
}
```

This will enable Varnish to accept ban requests over HTTP from the Citrus plugin.

Why "Citrus"?
---
Citrus juices are a [common alternative](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=stripping+varnish+citrus&t=osx&ia=products) to chemicals for stripping Varnish in the real world. The name felt snappy enough to use for this plugin!

Thanks
---
Many thanks to [aelvan](https://github.com/aelvan/VarnishPurge-Craft) for the original plugin onto which this one has been built.
